# MLB Data Science Project

Since the inception of Major League Baseball in 1871, much has changed over time. One factor, however, has remained consistent throughout the existence of the league: Those participating are typically between the ages of 20 and 42. Across this range, player performance varies. It is this relationship that this paper aims to explore. Utilizing a curated dataset from Fangraphs and Baseball Reference, I wish to examine the effects of age and aging on player performance in Major League Baseball. In exploring this relationship, I wish to gain insight into a variety of questions. The primary question, however, is as follows: At what age—or age range—does player performance peak? Is this rule consistent across all players, or does the age at which peak performance occurs vary for the individual? As to the relationship between age and player performance, I expect to observe a nonlinear relationship. More specifically, I expect overall performance to steadily improve at the outset of one’s career. Once one reaches a particular age, however, such improvement will be followed by a steep decline in overall performance. Identifying the age at which this peak occurs is my primary goal.

In addition to identifying the age at which overall performance peaks, I intend to examine player performance across several metrics. More specifically, I will examine various skills and statistics and determine their relationship to age. The primary metrics I will consider are On Base Percentage (OBP) and Stolen Bases (SB). My interest in these metrics stem from the skills they measure. OBP is a strong measure of discipline and SB is a reliable measure of speed. In analyzing these metrics, I wish to determine the relationship between age and the skills they measure. Across alternate performance measures and skills, does the age at which players peak differ?

While my over-arching analysis will be of the relationship between players’ age and on-field production, I plan to further explore the dataset. Through my exploration, I may perhaps also gain insight on additional properties related to age, such as if players’ peaks have remained consistent over time. That is, if players are currently peaking at the age of 27, does the same apply for players in 1910? Additionally, although my analysis will largely focus on hitters, it would be of interest to compare these findings to pitchers. Do pitchers and hitters experience alternate peak ages?
